Split "Electrum server" guide into an "Electrum server" (Electrs) and "Desktop wallet" (Sparrow) guides (#967)
raspibolt/raspibolt: guide/bitcoin/desktop-wallet.md

---
layout: default
title: Desktop wallet
nav_order: 30
parent: Bitcoin
---
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD014 MD022 MD025 MD033 MD040 -->

# Desktop wallet
{: .no_toc }

> We install the [Sparrow](https://github.com/romanz/electrs/){:target="_blank"} desktop wallet on a computer and connect it to your Electrum server on your node for private bitcoin on-chain transactions.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We install the [Sparrow](https://github.com/sparrowwallet/sparrow){:target="_blank"} desktop wallet on a computer and connect it to your Electrum server on your node for private bitcoin on-chain transactions.  
```

Author: Thanks for spotting this typo, fixed!

![Sparrow wallet](../../images/sparrow.png)

---

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

## Introduction

> We will connect Sparrow to our own Electrum server as it is the most private and secure option. For more information about the privacy and security trade-offs of the various server connection options, read the following [article](https://www.sparrowwallet.com/docs/best-practices.html){:target="_blank"} by Craig Raw, the author of Sparrow.

Reviewer 2: Here, I would also explain that Sparrow Wallet is a great choice, but that alternatives exist. Not every user wants to switch from the software wallet they're used to:

> You can also use the following alternatives instead of Sparrow Wallet, according to your preferences and needs: 
> * [Electrum](../bonus/bitcoin/electrum.md): a well-established poweruser wallet
> * [BitBoxApp](../bonus/bitcoin/bitboxapp.md): wallet for users of BitBox hardware wallets
> * [Trezor Suite](https://blog.trezor.io/connecting-your-wallet-to-a-full-node-edf56693b545){:target="_blank"}: wallet for users of Trezor hardware wallets

I'm not quite sure if you can use Ledger Live directly with an Electrum server. If so, I think we should add it too.

> We will connect Sparrow to our own Electrum server as it is the most private and secure option. For more information about the privacy and security trade-offs of the various server connection options, read the following [article](https://www.sparrowwallet.com/docs/best-practices.html){:target="_blank"} by Craig Raw, the author of Sparrow.

Reviewer 2: Perfect thanks. I think we wanted to list alternatives at some point (while still keeping one straight and simple implementation path through the guide), and here I think is a good point to start.

> Sparrow can connect to either your own Electrum server, or directly to your Bitcoin Core, or to a public Electrum server. We will connect Sparrow to our own Electrum server as it is the most private and secure option. For more information about the privacy and security trade-offs of the various server connection options, read the following [article](https://www.sparrowwallet.com/docs/best-practices.html){:target="_blank"} by Craig Raw, the author of Sparrow.

Reviewer 3: Now that the Bitcoin Core use case isn't documented anymore, should we remove the reference to it here?

Author: Well, I thought it was worth poitning out the different options.. but yes, can remove the first sentence for example. I think pointing to the linked article is a useful resource, but we could change the wording of the rest of the paragraph.

![Sparrow stages](../../images/sparrow-stages.png)

We will set up Sparrow to connect to Electrs within your local network. There is also an optional section at the end that explains how to connect Sparrow to Electrs using Tor for when you're on the move. 

> Sparrow also connects to a couple of external services to get the Bitcoin price and communicate with the Whirlpool server during coinjoin operations. By default, it uses clearnet which leaks your computer IP address to these services and degrade your privacy. However, Sparrow can also connect to them using a Tor proxy. Whether you are using Tor or not to connect to your node, in both cases we will set up the Tor proxy for Sparrow to privately connect to these external services.

Reviewer 3: Arhe connections to Whirlpool and Bitcoin price services through tor described in this doc? I can't find any other reference to them from this point.

If it's automatically done once the proxy is set, maybe this fact should be more clearly explained here. "Create a proxy, set it up in the connection and those will be taken care of, nothing more to do..."

Author: I'm not sure understand your point. This introductory paragraph aims at explaining the need to set up the Tor Proxy in Sparrow's network config to ensure that the connection to the external service are done privately via Tor.. It justifies/explains why later in the guide we require the user to install and launch the Tor Browser and set up the Tor Proxy in the configs.

Could you paste an amended paragraph with the modification you'd like to see?

Reviewer 3: I mean, if we setup tor, will Sparrow automatically use tor-based whirlpool and bitcoin price services?

Author: > I mean, if we setup tor, will Sparrow automatically use tor-based whirlpool and bitcoin price services?

That's exactly what I'm wondering as well! :) See post below. I don't know enough about Tor to guess if it's the case or not.. I  tried to ask on their TG group but got no reply so far.

Reviewer 2: I'm also no expert in this. If setting the Tor proxy solves all issues, I agree that this paragraph could be removed. 

Personally, I'd even make the "Tor" section optional, with a (very) short explanation. I'm not sure if hiding your IP address when querying for some exchange rates is a MUST. But I don't have a strong opinion on this.

Reviewer 2: IIUC, the current guide captures Sparrow's capabilities well:

* Use clearnet by default in your own network
* Use built-in Tor proxy when on the go
* For additional privacy, use external Tor proxy for external services (at home or on the go)

## Preparations

### Tor

> For Sparrow to connect to the external services via Tor, Tor has to be running on your computer. You can run the Tor Browser and use port 9150 on localhost or else run Tor as a background service and use port 9050.

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, maybe this section could be optional, with a very quick explanation here:

> Sparrow Wallet connects to external services to fetch exchange rates or when facilitating CoinJoins. This can reveal your IP address. If you care for maximum privacy, we recommend using Tor to obscure this information.

Here, we'll use the Tor Browser and port 9150 as it is easier to set up on Windows and macOS.

* Install the Tor Browser on your computer by following [this guide](https://tb-manual.torproject.org/installation/){:target="_blank"}.
* Launch the Tor Browser
* Click on "Always connect automatically" and "Connect"
* Keep the Tor Browser running while using Sparrow

> *Note:* For Linux Debian-based OS users, you might prefer to just have Tor running in the background and not have to open the Tor Browser each time you're using Sparrow. If so, instead of intalling the browser, simply install Tor with `sudo apt install tor` and check that it is running with `systemctl status tor`.

Reviewer 2: When using the Tor daemon, we should note that the proxy port is `9050` instead of `9150`

Reviewer 2: Nice. If you think it's too much, I'm happy if you keep it simple. As always, these are only suggestions.

## Installation

Still on your local computer, download, verify and install Sparrow.

* [Using the instructions on this page](https://www.sparrowwallet.com/download/){:target="_blank"}: 
  * Download the required version for your OS
  * Download the manifest and manifest signature files
  * Verify the release
  * Install Sparrow

---

## Local connection

We now configure Sparrow to connect to your node within your local network.

### Launch Sparrow

* Launch Sparrow
* Read carefully the introductory messages and click on "Next" several times
* When you reach the "Connecting to a Private Electrum Server" message, click on "Configure Server"

### Connect to Electrs

* Click on the "Private Electrum" tab

> * On the "URL" line, paste `raspibolt.local` or your node IP (e.g. `192.168.0.20`) in the first box and `50002` in the second box

Reviewer 3: Is it common to refer to this specific `192.168.0.20` IP elsewhere in the docs?

Should `e.g.` be replaced by `ex:`? I think `e.g.` means that this is the actual value and thus not an example.

Author: It's used in the guide yes, for example [here](https://raspibolt.org/guide/raspberry-pi/remote-access.html#find-your-raspberry-pi)
> You should now be able to reach your Pi, either with the hostname raspibolt.local or an IP address like 192.168.0.20.

Afaik, e.g. just means "for example"](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/e.g.) and is used in other parts of the guide.

Happy to use another notation though, as long as we apply it consistently throughtout the guide.. What would you have in mind?

Reviewer 3: Oh, my bad on this one... seems like it's fine as it is.

Reviewer 2: If we want to split hairs, "e.g." requires a comma immediately after ;-)

> your node IP (e.g., `192.168.0.20`)

> * Enable SSL by clicking on the slider (it should become blue)

Reviewer 3: That's my own opinion, but I'd remove some parenthesis in this docs, and here is a good example.

`Enable SSL by clicking on the slider. Then, make sure that it turns blue.`

Author: Good point! I removed the section in parenthesis altogother as it's not that useful anyway.

* Enable the Tor proxy by clicking on the "Use proxy" slider

> * On the "Proxy URL" line, paste `127.0.0.1` in the first box and either `9150` or `9050` in the second box depending if you run the Tor Browser or Tor as a background service.

Reviewer 2: It confuses me a bit that we connect to Electrs using a local connection, and enable Tor anyway.

I guess this comes from using the proxy for external services, but it's a bit out-of-scope for the section "Connect to Electrs". Especially in case you'd make the Tor section above optional. Maybe it could be split out of this section?

But maybe this is the simplest way to run through the configuration and we can all leave it as is. No strong opinion, just some thoughts, I'm happy to leave this up to you.

> * On the "Proxy URL" line, paste `127.0.0.1` in the first box and `9150` in the second box (or `9050` if you run Tor as a background service)

Reviewer 3: On the "Proxy URL" line, paste `127.0.0.1` in the first box and either `9150` or `9050` in the second box depending if you run Tor as a background service or not

Author: Fixed

* Click on "Test Connection". A green tick should appear on the button and you should see something similar to the following output:

  ```
  > Connected to electrs/0.9.5 on protocol version 1.4
  > [...]
  ```

![Sparrow connect to Electrs](../../images/sparrow-electrum+proxy.png)

If there is a connection error message, try the following troubleshooting:
* Make sure that your computer is not connected to any "guest" WiFi network at home. A "guest" WiFi network prevents the computer to connect to any other devices on the local network, such as your node.
* If you have used Sparrow before on this computer, try to connect again after deleting the existing certificates that are stored within the `certs` folder:
  * On Windows: `C:\Users\remi\AppData\Roaming\Sparrow\certs`
  * On macOS: `~/.sparrow/cert`
  * On Linux: `~/.sparrow/cert`

Now, let's go back to the wallet and check that the server and proxy are working properly.

* Close the server configuration window
* Check the two icons in the bottom right corner of the wallet window ![status icons](../../images/sparrow-server-proxy-icons.png)

>   * the first icon should be grey (not red) and a mouse hover should display "External Tor proxy enabled"

Author: Absolutely, good catch. Fixed!

  * The second icon should be a blue slider button and a mouse over should display "Connected to [...] at height [...]"

> You're set! Sparrow is now configured to connect to your Electrum server from within your LAN.

Reviewer 2: I'd replace "LAN" with "local network" to simplify

---

## Sparrow in action

Congratulations, you have now a Bitcoin desktop wallet, capable of securing your bitcoin, running with your own trustless Bitcoin full node!  
Sparrow is a powerful wallet that allows you to use the most advanced features for securing your bitcoins and preserve your privacy.

With Sparrow you can:

* Connect any hardware wallet
* Send and receive bitcoins
* Have full control throughout the transaction creation and signing process: coin control, PSBT, labelling, byte level transaction viewer...
* Create batched transactions to save on miner fees
* Create multisig wallets for improved security
* Coinjoin your coins for improved privacy
* Analyse your tansactions with the built-in blockchain explorer

For more information, tutorials and support, visit the [Sparrow documentation webpage](https://sparrowwallet.com/docs/){:target="_blank"} and their [Telegram group](https://t.me/sparrowwallet){:target="_blank"}.

---

## (Optional) Remote connection over Tor

> If you want to use Sparrow outside your LAN, when you're on the go, you can use a connection over Tor.

Reviewer 2: s/LAN/home network/

### Server Tor address

To connect via Tor to Electrs, the server must have a Tor hidden service connection address. Make sure you have set up a Tor hidden service as explained in the ["Electrum server" guide](electrum-server.md#remote-access-over-tor-optional).

If you've already set up the hidden service but lost the connection address, 
you can obtain it again by running the following command with "admin" on your node:

  ```
  $ sudo cat /var/lib/tor/hidden_service_electrs/hostname`
  > abcd...1234.onion
  ```

### Sparrow configuration

* Open Sparrow

> * Navigate to the server configuration page (`Ctrl`+`p` then click on "Server")

Reviewer 3: Navigate to the server configuration page by hitting `Ctrl`+`p` then click on "Server"

Author: Fixed!

### Launch Sparrow

* Launch Sparrow
* Read carefully the introductory messages and click on "Next" several times
* When you reach the "Connecting to a Private Electrum Server" message, click on "Configure Server"

### Connect to Electrs

* Click on the "Private Electrum" tab
* On the "URL" line, paste `raspibolt.local` or your node IP (e.g., `192.168.0.20`) in the first box and `50002` in the second box
* Enable SSL by clicking on the slider
* Click on "Test Connection". A green tick should appear on the button and you should see something similar to the following output:

  ```
  > Connected to electrs/0.9.5 on protocol version 1.4
  > [...]
  ```

![Sparrow connect to Electrs](../../images/sparrow-electrum-no-proxy.png)

If there is a connection error message, try the following troubleshooting:
* Make sure that your computer is not connected to any "guest" WiFi network at home. A "guest" WiFi network prevents the computer to connect to any other devices on the local network, such as your node.
* If you have used Sparrow Wallet before on this computer, try to connect again after deleting the existing certificates that are stored within the `certs` folder:

>   * On Windows: `C:\Users\remi\AppData\Roaming\Sparrow\certs`

Reviewer 2: maybe replace username 'remi' with something generic, like 'username'?

Author: fixed!

  * On macOS: `~/.sparrow/cert`

>   * On Linux: `~/.sparrow/cert`

Reviewer 2: As mentioned by Craig, for both macOS and Linux:

s/cert/certs/

Author: fixed

> Now, let's go back to the wallet and check that the server and proxy are working properly.

Reviewer 2: It's less about the server working properly, and without Tor we don't need the proxy at this point. Maybe:

>  Let's go back to the wallet and check that it is connected to our own Electrum server.

Author: Good point, I forgot to change that sentence
